# lang-n-change

## What is it?

lang-n-change is a tool for transforming languages.
It provides a domain-specific language, L-Tr (pronounced "Elter"), for expressing algorithms that perform language transformations.

Given a language definition expressed in the style of operational semantics (`.lan` file) and an algorithm (`.tr` file), the algorithm is applied to the language definition, producing a new language definition.

L-Tr is based on a calculus of the same name, described in [1].
A prototype of lang-n-change is presented in [2].
The current tool is a new and improved version of the prototype.

Algorithms expressed in L-Tr are compiled to an OCaml program (`support/transform.ml`) which is then run with the language definition as the sole argument.

Additionally, language definitions can be compiled to executable λProlog logic programs.
This feature can be used to run queries on the generated languages in order to test their behavior.

## Requirements

- OCaml (>= 4.08)
- a POSIX-compliant shell

Additionally, the following OCaml packages are required (available through `opam` via `opam install <pkg>`):

- core_kernel (>= 0.14.0)
- dune (>= 2.7.1)
- menhir
- ocamlformat
- ppx_compare
- ppx_hash
- ppx_let
- ppx_sexp_conv

For compiling to λProlog, the most recent version of Teyjus (https://github.com/teyjus/teyjus) is needed to compile and query the generated `.mod` and `.sig` files.
Teyjus is known to build with OCaml 4.08.1.
If you are using a newer version of the OCaml compiler, then it is recommended that you create a new switch on opam for building Teyjus: `opam switch create <name> 4.08.1`.

## Building

Run `dune build lnc` to build the project.

**DO NOT** run `dune build`, as the program `support/transformer.ml` requires the generated `support/transform.ml` file, which is obviously not there by default.

## Transforming languages

Run `./transform <.lan> <.tr>`. The transformed language definition is printed to `stdout`.

### Examples

The following algorithms are found in the `examples/` directory:

- `big.tr` transforms a small-step functional language with evaluation contexts to use big-step semantics.
- `pattern_matching.tr` adds pattern-matching as a top-level operator to a functional language. 
- `ref.tr` adds mutable references and other imperative-style features to a functional language.
- `subtyping.tr` adds algorithmic subtyping for a functional language (excludes width/row-subtyping).

### Gradualizer

The `gradualizer/` directory contains algorithms for adding gradual typing to a functional language. It is based on the methodologies described in [3] and [4], and contains one-to-one translations of the language repositories for both papers (`gradualizer/static` and `gradualizer/dynamic`) respectively (see https://github.com/mcimini/Gradualizer and https://github.com/mcimini/GradualizerDynamicSemantics).

- `gradual_static.tr` generates the static semantics (type system), including the Cast Calculus.
- `gradual_dynamic.tr` generates the dynamic semantics with elimination forms for the `cast` operator.

## Compiling to λProlog

Run `./lprolog <.lan>`. The generated `.mod` and `.sig` files are created in the directory `lp/<name of .lan>/` and compiled/linked using Teyjus (`tjcc` and `tjlink`, respectively; note that these are assumed to be visible from your `PATH` environment variable).

## TODO

- Add documentation for language definitions.
- Add documentation for L-Tr.
- Add more syntactic sugar to L-Tr to provide a more concise, declarative style that doesn't resemble a typical functional language.
- Separate the type-checker for L-Tr from the actual code generator, and produce a typed AST.
- Improve type inference for the L-Tr compiler. Currently it exists in a very limited form (i.e. it does not operate over the entire program), and it may diverge on certain inputs.
- Improve the error messages generated by the L-Tr compiler (line/column numbers would be a good start).
- Improve the λProlog backend (especially w.r.t. type inference).
- The parsers for language definitions and L-Tr (especially) have many grammar ambiguities to be resolved.

## References

[1] Mourad B., Cimini M. (2020) A Calculus for Language Transformations. In: Chatzigeorgiou A. et al. (eds) SOFSEM 2020: Theory and Practice of Computer Science. SOFSEM 2020. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 12011. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-38919-2_44

[2] Mourad B., Cimini M. (2020) System Description: Lang-n-Change - A Tool for Transforming Languages. In: Nakano K., Sagonas K. (eds) Functional and Logic Programming. FLOPS 2020. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 12073. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-59025-3_12

[3] Matteo Cimini and Jeremy G. Siek. 2016. The gradualizer: a methodology and algorithm for generating gradual type systems. SIGPLAN Not. 51, 1 (January 2016), 443–455. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2914770.2837632 

[4] Matteo Cimini and Jeremy G. Siek. 2017. Automatically generating the dynamic semantics of gradually typed languages. SIGPLAN Not. 52, 1 (January 2017), 789–803. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3093333.3009863 
